# Entanglement-in-Nervous-System
Providing a new way to understand the neural synchronization in CNS.

As we know, a human brain contains up to hundreds of billions of neurons in the form of complex networks through synapses. Inspired by its layered structures, forward transduction of signals, and the plasticity of the strength, scientists formulated the the concept of deep learning neural network which laid the groundwork for the modern artificial intelligence. Like the brain, in a network model the connections (weights) between two nodes of neighboring layers are constantly adjusted during learning process (through some efficient backpropagation algorithm) to improve the model's predictive capabilities. In a nutshell, the “classical physics” of the brain led the modern AI revolution.

Nowadays, the so-called large models dominate the AI field, comprising trillions of neurons. Such systems cost huge amount of electricity with billions of kilowatt-hours. These are astronomical numbers as often reported in the public. Though their performances are impressive in chatting with humans, they are yet to compete with human brains in many aspects. In contrast a human brain is extremely energy efficient, consuming merely 20 watts on the average. Note that the action potential in neurons is diffusive and dissipative. So, are we missing something here? 

On to another aspect of recent development, quantum computation based on the property of quantum entanglement arises with the promise that its algorithms will crack the RSA encryption employed in nearly all of our current IT systems. Quantum entanglement, described by Einstein as "spooky action at a distance," is a cornerstone of quantum computing, giving quantum information strong secrecy and algorithm supremacy far surpassing its classical counterpart. IBM and Google have developed processors with up to a hundred qubits, marking the dawn of a new era in computing. Macroscopic quantum effects (achieved via Josephson junctions), though usually at ultra low temperature (down to milli Kelvins), provide a solid physical foundation, making the realization and manipulation of qubits possible. 

Could quantum entanglement also hold the key to understand the ultra-low consumption of energy in a human brain (albeit at normal temperature)? Millions of years of evolution have made the brain the most complex organ in a human body. Can quantum mechanics be invoked in the process? If so it might solve some puzzles with what the human brain can achieve. Nobel laureate Roger Penrose first proposed in the 1990s that quantum computing in the brain might be the source of consciousness. Matthew Fisher made similar attempts with elaborate scheme, sparking researchers' interest in relating the brain's unparalleled abilities to the immense potential of quantum mechanics.

The law of quantum mechanics holds undoubtedly at the molecular level in chemistry and biology. But whether it has physiological effects at the cell level or above remains elusive. Some recent experiments appear to validate the possibility. Chen. Y. -C., along with some authors of the reviewed paper (including Nobel laureate in quantum physics Prof. Leggett) (<u>https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.257402</u>), discovered that the high-efficiency energy transfer in (artificial or real) photosynthesis may be mediated over distance by exciton-polaritons, a result of strong coupling of photon and phonon in certain type of organic / bio molecules. Additionally, Song team in neuroscience found credible evidence that mid- to far-infrared light sources in organisms can efficiently drive biochemical reactions and physiological activities in live cells.

Going back to quantum cognition, a term favored by the earlier pioneers, where could the crucial source of quantum entanglement come from? Liu et al. ( <u>http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.110.024402</u> ) of the preprint you provided sheds new light. Myelin, a thin-layered insulating material that wraps the axons of central nerve system may have the pivot role in the business, in addition to  their normal duty of speeding up the neutral signal transmission (by a lot). They pointed out, basically on rather standard calculation with realistic assumptions, that "entangled photons can be generated through cascaded radiation in cylindrical cavities formed by neural myelin," offering a potential source of continuous generation of quantum entanglement in the central nerve system. This prediction is fascinating. They considered the neural myelin as a cavity, where the wavelength of electromagnetic waves matches the wavelengths of bio-photons generated by organisms. 

Where can we go from here? The hope is that the continuous in-flow of the entangled photons might find a way to entangle (i.e. pass on to) vibrational modes of ion channels within neurons, between neurons, across the neural networks, and form "ripples" in the brain. Consequently, the non-local effects of quantum entanglement may enable for example neural synchronization, making some solid step towards quantum computing in the brain.

Adding quantum entanglement into brain science is rather speculative in nature. The authors have shown this through solid quantum mechanical calculation, which could hopefully create some excitement and potentially open a new channel in the field. Incidentally, neurological diseases such as Alzheimer and Parkinson are also closely related to neural synchronization and meylin. Understanding the cause of these diseases can help the treatment. Studying the human brain the classical way has already unlocked the power of artificial intelligence, can a quantum version lead to, say, better development of quantum computation? It is probable, and we might have just seen the first sign of the flashing light.

**Paper LINK** : <u>http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.110.024402</u>
